It's important to understand that Flutter indeed does not just have the widget tree which I mentioned
over and over again already but that it has a second and even a third tree,
the element tree and another tree. So the widget tree is what you already learned about
but as I just mentioned, there also is an element tree and there even is a third tree, render tree.
Now you with your code, you control the widget tree, the other two trees are controlled internally by
Flutter but they are based on your widget tree. The widget tree which you're creating with your code
and which is built by Flutter by calling the build method is essentially just a bunch of configuration
Flutter takes into account,
it's not directly output on the screen or anything like that,
instead it simply describes to Flutter what should be output on the screen.
So it's just a bunch of configuration settings you could say. The element tree then is important because
the element tree is created by Flutter automatically based on your widget tree and it links your widgets
to the actual rendered objects.
Now where the widget tree is constantly changing basically whenever you call set state for example,
so whenever the build methods get executed, Flutter rebuilds that widget tree, whilst that happens relatively
often, the element tree is managed differently and does not rebuild with every call to the build method
and it links the widgets, the configuration you set up with the actually rendered elements which are
part of the render tree. So the render tree in the end you could say is the representation of what
really ends up on the screen, what you see on the screen
and that also is rarely rebuilt.
Now let's have a more concrete example.
This is our widget tree,
we have a container and in the container, we have a column and in there, we have a stateless and a stateful
custom widget which of course in turn then have other Flutter widgets in them, like text widgets
and so on.
Now for every widget you have in the widget tree, Flutter automatically creates an element.
It does so when it first encounters that widget,
so for example when the app starts or if you have an if condition and some condition is now true
and that means that now a new widget should be rendered which hasn't been rendered before.
Whenever Flutter encounters a widget for which it has no element yet, it creates an element. So an element
in the end is just an object
you could say managed in memory by Flutter which holds a reference at its widget. The element itself
has no internal configuration, it really just points at the widget which then holds the configuration.
So if you have a container with let's say a background color, the container element would indeed just
be a relatively empty box pointing at the widget which then holds the information about the background
color and so on.
Now such elements get created for all widgets. Now important for stateful widgets,
there you had this create state method, you remember? Like here in new transaction. In the widget itself
which extends stateful widget, you had the create state method which in the end is called by Flutter
to create a new state object based on your state class down there.
This split into two classes, we'll soon make more sense because when Flutter encounters a stateful widget,
it also creates an element but then it also calls the create state method and creates a state object
as well which is also connected to the element and it indirectly therefore is of course related to your
widget.
The important thing here really is however that the element has a reference at the widget which holds
all the configuration for that element and then it also holds a reference to the state object which
is an independent object, not part of the widget or anything like that but an independent object managed
in memory.
So these are the elements but if they're just basically empty boxes pointing at a widget, what is their
role?
Well they're not just pointing at a widget,
they also point at the rendered box, at the rendered object you see on the screen.
Now whenever Flutter encounters an element which hasn't been rendered to the screen you could say, it
does render it to the screen and it does so by looking at the widget at which this element also points
which holds all the information you need for painting it to the screen, like a background color, a border
the size, such things. Flutter then paints that box to the screen,
if you want to go really deep into the details here, there actually are multiples steps involved here.
It has the layouting phase where it derives the available space, the dimensions and how that should be sized
and then it also has a phase where it basically sets up listeners to tap events and so on but we can
ignore this here. For simplification, let's simply assume that an element which hasn't been rendered
to the screen yet is rendered to the screen.
So the element then has a pointer at the element on the screen, so at the object on the screen and at the
widget which holds the configuration and of course every element has a rendered equivalent, which kind
of ends up on the screen. You can see that if you go back to your code when you open up the Dart
DevTools,
I showed this earlier in the debugging section. In the Dart DevTools, you can see your widget tree
here on the left and there of course, we see all the widgets we use but the interesting thing is for
example if you click on a container here, you'll see that a container internally also uses a
ConstrainedBox
and then here, you see that render object for that ConstrainedBox.
So that kind of is what ends up on the screen or what Flutter uses internally to know what to render
on the screen,
so what to hand off to the rendering engine which is then the core of Flutter and of Dart which
actually paints pixels on the screen
and that's now way to advanced, we'll not focus on how that happens technically
but this is what Flutter does in the end. It renders content on the screen and it bases that content should
be rendered on your widgets and the elements are the middleman which connect your widgets which hold
the configuration and the parts that end up on the screen.
Now that's of course all good
but what does this mean for the build method? The build method is called by Flutter whenever your state
changes.
There are basically two important triggers that can lead to a rebuild,
one is when you call set state, like here in the main.dart file when we delete a transaction. Calling set
state automatically leads to build being called, to be very precise,
what's happening is that calling set state marks this widget and therefore the element that belongs
to the widget as dirty, so as something changed here and for the next refresh, which for 60 frames per
second happens every 60 milliseconds, 1000 milliseconds divided by 60,
so for the next refresh, Flutter will then take the new configuration as created by build into account
and update the screen. So set state leads to a screen update and what it basically does is it triggers
the build method.
Now when the build method execute, this code simply gets executed like any other Dart code would get
executed and that of course means that if you use other widgets here, which you typically do, like the Cupertino
navigation bar here or the appBar here or then down here, a row, these things here,
these calls in the end all of course are widgets but most importantly, these are all classes, column here
is a Dart class and we're instantiating it here.
You absolutely have to remember when working with widgets and all that stuff that in the end, I of course
always call this a widget because it is a widget but it's also always a Dart class and that means we
can instantiate it like any other Dart class, just as we instantiate a transaction based on our transaction
class earlier,
up here, there I called transaction using the constructor of the transaction class.
We're doing the exact same thing down there in the build method for container and column and so on.
Now since the build method runs again, of course new instances of all these classes are created.
So a new widget tree is basically created here with new instances of all these widget classes and that
is not a mistake or an error,
this is actually how it should be because widgets, the widget tree itself is immutable,
that means you can't change the property of an existing widget,
you can't say this container should now have a background color of white by simply editing the property
of the container.
Instead, you can simply override the container,
this part of the widget tree, with a brand new container which has the new configuration
and this is enforced by Flutter because it can more efficiently detect changes when an object changes,
so when you have a brand new object which has a new address in memory than when you change a property
on an existing object which has the old address in memory.
So this is simply a pattern enforced by Flutter.
Before we dive deeper into that though, here's one other important note.
I mentioned that set state of course calls build,
the same is true if you use something like media query of or theme of and you even see that here if
you hover over media query, you'll see that querying the current media query will cause your widget
to rebuild automatically whenever the MediaQueryData changes.
So for example when you rotate the device, the MediaQueryData changes because orientation is information
stored in the MediaQueryData and therefore, rotating your device automatically also triggers build
to run.
The same is true if the soft keyboard appears because you might remember in new transaction, that there,
we refer to the viewInsets.bottom setting here that tells us how much space is occupied by the
soft keyboard.
So therefore, since this is also part of the MediaQueryData, whenever the soft keyboard appears, any
widget that refers to media query will automatically get rebuilt.
That's the idea here and that all triggers build. So that already was a lot of talking,
we now know when build runs and we know that when build executes, the widget tree or this part of the
widget tree is recreated.
Let's now dig deeper into that.